A digital loonie may be on the way — and thanks to blockchain, money will never be the same again
By Star staff
Wed., March 4, 2020

Emerging technologies such as blockchain and cryptocurrencies are compelling subjects for Alex Tapscott. The author, 
public speaker and venture capital investor’s new book “Financial Services Revolution, How Blockchain is Transforming Money, 
Markets and Banking,” was co-authored with his father Don Tapscott. The Star spoke to the younger Tapscott recently 
about uses for blockchain, security concerns and possibility of the Bank of Canada introducing a digital loonie.

Can you explain what blockchain is?

Simply put, blockchain is the most important computer science innovation in a generation and it’s ushering in a new era 
for the internet — an internet of value. You see, when you use the internet to send information you’re sending a copy 
and retaining an original (think email). That works for information but not money, financial assets or anything 
that requires scarcity. So we still rely on middlemen. After all, when I send you money you need to know I don’t still 
have a copy. Historically we’ve needed an intermediary to establish trust. Blockchain solves this problem. For the 
first time in human history we have a digital medium for value that will enable individuals to transact and store value 
in virtually every kind of asset peer to peer in a private, secure and trustless way without the need for middlemen like banks.

What are the most promising uses of blockchain?

Blockchain will do for capital and assets what the internet did for newspapers, film, and TV. It will force us to rethink 
the deep structure and workings of many industries, starting with finance.

In this next shift, not only could the U.S. dollar be displaced by a synthetic alternative or a Chinese crypto-yuan, 
but virtually every marketplace — from securities like stocks and bonds, to insurance, accounting, audit and venture capital, 
as well as new assets like our identities, never before owned and monetized as assets by individuals — will be made 
virtually unrecognizable.

Do you think Facebook’s proposed currency Libra will materialize?

When Facebook announced its plan to create digital money called Libra, incumbents immediately pushed back. Even though Facebook 
has marketed Libra mainly as a way to bank the unbanked — a noble cause, to be sure — it wants to deploy this coin across its platform, 
for use in all forms of commerce online and off, which would position Facebook as a powerful new player in the global financial system. 
It could change how, where, and with whom billions of people spend and save, borrow and loan, and otherwise finance and insure their lives 
and livelihoods — and current legislators, regulators, and masters of the universe are having none of it. This is a watershed moment. 
Facebook is one of the largest landlords of our digital economy, and its actions are far-reaching.

First, Facebook is placing itself in the crosshairs of lawmakers and regulators as they wrestle for control over finance, money, and 
influence among citizen users. Second, by wading into the massive, complex world of financial services, Facebook is pitting itself 
against big banks as well as bit tech. Does anyone expect Jeff Bezos to allow Libra on Amazon, without launching an alternative? 
Finally, Libra, like bitcoin, could forever alter the traditional role of fiat money in the global economy. Just as cellular technology 
allowed billions to leapfrog land lines, Libra’s blockchain-based platform has the potential to leapfrog the traditional banking 
infrastructure of today.

In “Financial Services Revolution,” there’s much discussion of international transfer of funds being deliberately and unnecessarily slow. 
How hard will it be for existing financial institutions to be convinced to give up their profit margins on these?

With paradigm shifts, leaders of the old are often last to embrace the new, if they survive to embrace it at all. So why did 
Blockbuster not create Netflix, and why did Sears not create Amazon? One reason is the innovator’s dilemma, where disrupters of 
old paradigms have trouble disrupting themselves. But leaders of today’s banking giants need to understand that they’re standing 
on a burning platform where the risk of taking a leap into the unknown is actually lower than the risk of staying put — because eventually 
that platform will be engulfed and collapse.

Do recent major hacks on digital currencies that use blockchain, including Ethereum Classic last year, pose a confidence problem?

Blockchains are highly secure but they are not unhackable. If I say they’re unhackable I’ll surely get hacked tomorrow! However, 
large established blockchains such as bitcoin, Hyperledger and even Ethereum have proven highly resilient to attack. 
Certainly they are far more secure than traditional methods for storing data, which have proven very vulnerable — think Equifax, 
Target or the Democratic National Committee.